All right, so, we got a very basic
web page here to start to talk about
inheritance, and
what we have going on here.
So, always the best thing to do,
any time you start to work with
CSS is to take a look at the HTML.
Remember CSS is all about patterns and
finding patterns in the HTML.
And we may find those patterns through IDs
and classes, but there's always a pattern
in the HTML that we're trying to latch
on to in our CSS and apply styles.
So, here we have an article, it has an ID
of Bob, we have an h1 for our title.
We have a paragraph that
has a class of cloud,
inside of that we have an image and
we have some text and we have a link.
In our second paragraph we have a class
of tree, it has a strong in there,
the strong has an ID,
we have a link in there.
And then down at the bottom we
have a footer for the article,
the footer has a link as well and
then we end our article.
Okay, by the way those of
you who are thinking, hey,
she's using a float,
isn't that kind of old school?
Actually this is the reason
that floats were invented.
Floats are all about taking an image.
If my text was longer, it would
eventually wrap around this image and
continue down the page.
This is why we have floats inside of CSS,
what is old school is using floats for
layout.
So any time we were laying out
whole web pages in floats,
we used to do that about ten years ago
because we didn't have any other options.
That is the difference between
using floats in this context and
using floats for layouts today.
All right, so then for our CSS, we have
our border box styling to start with.
I've declared the body
has an Arial font on it.
And there's the information about
the image, we have a max width of 100%.
That makes it flexible,
if the window gets smaller,
the image will scale down in size.
We floated it right and then we put
a little bit of margin on it so
that the text doesn't run into it.
So one of the things that you'll often
see me do is this exact declaration here,
I've got the body with
a font family on it.
So I've never actually said that the h1
should have an Arial font to it.
I never said the paragraphs had
to have an Arial font to it.
We just assume that they do, and perhaps
you have been coding for some time,
you've never really thought about the fact
that you've not specifically telling each
of these elements what kind
of font family to have.
That is inheritance in action, it's kind
of like having someone come to your house,
and you say,
please paint my entire house white.
We don't have to say, paint the kitchen
white, paint the bathroom white,
paint the bedroom white.
We just say, paint the house white,
except for that bedroom I want it green,
the wall in that bedroom I want it blue,
so we can specify exceptions to that.
Likewise here we can do the same.
As you have seen me demonstrate
before I could say for
example h1, and
I could say font-family Times serif,
and my h1 would change to a Times font,
you may say,
well, okay,
Jen that's the last one here on the list.
That's why that one wins.
But I'm going to take this h1 and
move this up.
So if we put this, I'll put it even right
here at the very top of my style sheet.
And Bob Ross, more Bob Ross wisdom, is
still Times for its font, and the reason
why is because we're very specific about
the element that we're trying to style.
So here h1, we have body, article, h1,
and we're specifically targeting that h1.
We're overriding the body which is simply
inheriting, but we're specifically calling
out that h1 as the Times font, and that
is why it displays that way on the page.
This will be true even if I did
something like this, I could say,
Bob, the ID Bob,
which is on the article, and
here I could say something
like font-family,
our old friend Comic Sans.
I think I have to do Comic Sans Ms.
There we go.
So, my ID of Bob has got
the Comic Sans font on it,
and you can see here that it's
overwritten the body font.
And that is because, once again,
although it doesn't show in code pen,
remember the body element is assumed.
So I'll just type one in here for
you so you can see it.
Our body element was said to be Arial,
article with the ID of Bob is now set
to be Comic Sans but the h1 still
comes later and it's showing as Times.
So in this case we have an element
beating an ID, so to speak, and
it's due to inheritance because
the inheritance is taking priority
in this case over specificity,
and the cascade in some cases.
And again, I've got the h1 coming later,
I can put it earlier.
It will still win over my ID.
Okay.
That's all kind of ugly, so
let's just get rid of those.
Then the last thing I wanna talk
about here is the difference
between the universal selector and
the body element.
So as you know in the display
part of your webpage,
the body element encompasses
basically all of your visible HTML.
The head element is gonna
encompasses your meta tags, and
your titles, and
all the things that are basically for
machines, not necessarily for
a visitor to your webpage.
In this case, the body element is the one
that encompasses all that visible stuff.
So oftentimes people will use,
instead of body,
they will use star to set
their font family for
all of these elements on the page.
And you look at that and say, well,
there's really no difference
between those two, but there is.
The difference is here we are working with
a property, font family, that inherits.
And so between body or
star there is in fact no difference,
in the final result anyway.
But with body, we go back to body here and
I add to this a border.
1px solid red, border of course does
not inherit, so what do we get?
We get a border around the body of the
webpage, remember that image is floated,
we haven't cleared that float.
And so the float is hanging
outside of the webpage right now.
And I can go through how we can go
about clearing that if you like,
but that that is what's going on there.
So we have a single border because
the border property is not inherited.
If I change body to the star property,
Notice
that we now have all of the elements
on this webpage have a border on them.
So what we've done instead of saying,
we're going to set the Arial
font on the body element and
just let inheritance work,
here we are specifically declaring
a font family on every single element
inside of this particular webpage.
So every element gets its own
special declaration for the font.
Every element is now of course
also getting a border as well.
So that's the difference
between those two.
I usually prefer to let inheritance work,
and so I tend to use body.
While we're here for those of you who
are wondering about clearing a float,
we could do that.
Normally what you would do is look at,
Here.
We could look at the article for example
as a way we could clear on the article,
we could clear on the cloud paragraph,
just depends on where we wanna have
some of that extra space to appear.
Let's say we wanna clear on the article.
I know a lot of you are fans
of the overflow property,
which is one way of doing this, but
there's a new way to do it as well.
And this is with the display
flow-route property.
And notice that that will
clear that float for you.
Now, you have that image all encompassed
inside of this particular webpage.
So, I hope that helped some,
in terms of clearing floats
as well as a little bit of
basics about inheritance.
Do we have any questions so far?
>> Person said, nice,
haven't used floats in a long time.
>> Yeah.
[LAUGH] Okay.
>> So, what's with the colon root?
>> Colon root?
Up here at the, yeah,
that's a good question.
Okay, so colon root, so what is root?
Remember that in CSS we think
of them as HTML elements.
In JavaScript we think of these as nodes,
right?
So we have body, the body element,
we have before and
after the body element as
things that we can access.
Root this is a pseudo class that
will access the route of the body,
often that is HTML, right?
The HTML element, that may be outside of
that if there's a node outside of that.
The other thing that root does is
it has the specificity of a class.
So it has a higher specificity than
just using a type selector like HTML or
body and that may also help depending
on how you're writing your CSS,
for declaring your various variables.
So root, this route notation is
something that's kind of evolved,
it's where we're gonna put
in our variables, right?
So my specific red color is gonna be,
whatever, ff0000.
Then that is how most commonly
root is used these days, it's for
holding globally scoped
variables in our CSS.
Let's talk about visibility none,
I'm sorry,
display none versus visibility hidden.
Let's talk about the difference
between these two.
I know you are familiar with display
none because it's a really popular one.
If I said to my image here and I'm just
going to declare this as a separate
declaration, display:none
,notice what happens here.
The image disappears, the space that
the image occupied goes away, and
we now have a very short little bit
of text that's here on the page.
You probably have used display
none all over the place but
you may not be aware of its cousin,
which is visibility.
Visibility is inherited.
And it has some interesting
characteristics when you use it here
on the webpage.
So instead of display none,
if I set this to visibility,
actually let me remove that.
Now the image is back, visibility: hidden.
My image disappears, so
notice that the space that that
image occupied is still there.
So that's kind of fun and different.
We have that space still there and
available for
a different image for example.
It's kind of like the difference between
absolute and relative positioning,
they function in the same kind of way.
When we do absolute positioning and
you move something on your webpage,
the space that it occupied collapses, as
opposed to relative positioning where you
move something on the page
with relative positioning,
the space that it occupied remains open.
So display none and visibility hidden
are similar types of properties to that.
We could continue on with
this just to show you.
If we chose one of our paragraphs here,
like the cloud,
let's say that first paragraph here.
Let's also make that visibility:hidden,
so you can see here that
our space continues to be available and
for that image and for the text.
If we change the size of the image,
notice that all the compensation
is happening here on the screen.
We're redrawing as if the image and
the text were still there.
So visibility hidden is inherited
while display none is not.
All right, and the last property
that I'd like to introduce to you,
while we're here, Has to do with links.
Now, I know you're really
familiar with links.
Normally the way that we write links
these days is a' and we say something
like color:red, and then we'll say
something like a:hover and we'll say,
Text-decoration: none, great.
So when I hover over my links, the text
decoration disappears, all is well.
Normally we style this way because we
wanna have our unvisited link color and
our visited link color the same.
So A by itself encompasses all of those.
But I'd like to point out that we
now also have a class for this.
It is called the any-link class or sorry,
pseudo class,
which will also style the link state and
the visited link state
together as a single item.
So, if you are having a specificity
problem somewhere along the way
where your A style by itself is
getting overwritten in some way,
that any-link pseudo class may also
be useful to you for styling links.